Time-stamp: <>
Maker:		StFlowAnalysisMaker
Files:		StFlowAnalysisMaker.cxx
		StFlowAnalysisMaker.hh
		plot.C	
Authors:	Art Poskanzer and Raimond Snellings
		with lots of help from Glenn Cooper 
Date:		Dec 1999
Description:

Makes histograms for the flow analysis. If the FlowTagDB exist, it
reads from it. Otherwise, it reads the event quantities from
StFlowEvent. In either case it reads the particle quantities from
StFlowEvent. It removes autocorrelations of each particle with respect
to the event plane and for each harmonic makes a 2D histogram of v
vs. y and p_t.

In Finish, it calculates the event plane resolution from the
correlation of sub-event event planes. It then corrects the v
histograms for the event plane resolution. It fits the q histogram
with the q distribution. It calculates the PhiWgts needed to make the
event plane isotropic in the lab and outputs them as
flowPhiWgtNew.hist.root . To use these PhiWgts in the next analysis
you have to copy the root file to flowPhiWgt.hist.root . If the file
flowPhiWgt.hist.root is missing the PhiWgts are set to 1.0 .

Plot.C is a macro for plotting the histograms and their
projections. It asks for a run number which will be printed at the
bottom left of the plot. It presents you with a menu of possible
plots. If you know the plot number you want you can invoke the macro
with that number as an argument. If you execute the macro with all
three arguments (plot number, selection number, harmonics number) for
a graph that has multiple harmonics and selections, it will plot only
the histogram for that selection and harmonic. After it has been
loaded and executed once it can be rerun simply with plot(). For
better graphics you can first execute boldStyle.C or videoStyle.C .

